hey everybody how's it going in this
programming terms video we'll be going
over the term first class functions now
we're going to look at first class
functions in both JavaScript and in
Python so you can see the concept in two
different languages and that may help
the term sink in a little bit but don't
worry if you don't know either of these
languages what's important to take away
from the video is the concept of first
class functions and not the specific
syntax of any one language so
understanding first class functions will
help you understand other terms such as
higher water functions currying and
closures so it's a very useful term to
note ok so what is a first class
function if you look up the definition
on Wikipedia one of the first lines
you'll see is that it says a programming
language is said to have first-class
functions if it treats functions as
first-class citizens and then if you
look up first-class citizens for
programming it says that a first-class
citizen some kind sometimes called a
first-class object in a programming
language is an entity which supports all
the operations generally available to
other entities these operations
typically include being passed as an
argument returned from a function and
assigned to a variable ok so what
exactly does that mean so that means
that we should be able to treat
functions just like any other object or
variable so I think this will be more
clear once we take a look at these
coding examples so here on the Left I
have Python and here on the right I have
JavaScript so you can see this concept
working in two different languages ok so
first of all let's see what it means to
assign a function to a variable now this
doesn't mean that we are assigning the
result of the function to a variable
this is where some people get confused
so and the example I have pulled up here
this is what we're used to doing with
functions so we have a function called
Square and we're setting this variable F
equal to the square of 5 now down here
on this line I'm printing out the
function Square and I'm printing out
this variable F so I'm going to go ahead
and run that and then I'm going to do
the same thing in JavaScript and I'll go
ahead and run that so you can see
whenever I print out the function square
you can see that it prints out that it
is a function called square now
print out F it's printing out 25 and
that's because we passed into five to
the square function and that's the same
thing here in JavaScript it's printing
out the function square that we logged
out and we're also logging F which is
the square of five now what a lot of
people don't realize is that we can
remove these parentheses here and set
our variable F to the square function so
if I take out these parentheses and save
that and let me do the same thing here
in JavaScript and now we did take out
those parentheses a lot of people get
tripped up at this point and they only
take out the arguments and they leave in
the parenthesis but you don't want to do
that because the parentheses mean that
we're going to execute the function we
don't want to execute the function we
just want to set our variable F equal to
the function not executed so now that I
have my variable F equal to square what
if I run this now so let me run this
code so now you can see that when it
prints out F F is equal to our square
function so this is one of the aspects
of what it means to be a first-class
function so now we can treat the
variable f as a function so now I can
use f just like I would use square so
instead of printing out F what if I
print out f of five and I run it just
like a function so you can see now I get
25 there if I do the same thing in
JavaScript then I will get 25 there as
well so so far we assigned a function to
a variable but we can also pass
functions as arguments and return
functions as the result of other
functions so let's take a look at both
of those examples and by the way if a
function accepts other functions as
arguments or returns functions as their
result that's what you call a
higher-order function so first let's
look at an example of passing a function
as an argument to another function so a
great example of this is the map
function in both Python and in
JavaScript so the map function takes a
function and an array as its arguments
and it runs each value of that array
through the provided function and then
returns a new array of those results so
I think that will be more clear if we
take a look at an
example here so I have a sample map
function here this isn't the built-in
map function but what we're going to do
is just build our own from scratch so
that way we can see exactly what's going
on okay so let me take out all these old
variables here and uncomment out this
and I'll push these down for now and let
me do the same thing over here in
JavaScript so let me go ahead and move
these up okay let me go ahead and
uncomment out this code here okay so we
have a custom built map function here
which is going to behave kind of like
the built-in map function and what we're
doing is we are taking in a function as
an argument and then we're taking in an
array as an argument and then here we're
going to create an empty result array
loop through all of the items in the
passed an array and run each of those
items through the function that we
passed in as an argument and append that
to the result and then after we're done
we're going to return the result so you
can see here I have an example where I'm
setting this squares variable equal to
the my map function I'm passing in the
square function that we created up here
and then I'm also passing in a list of
values from 1 to 5 and again both here
and Python and in JavaScript notice that
I'm not using the parentheses when I
pass this square function in to this
other function because adding the
parentheses would try to execute the
function and that's not where what we're
doing here
we aren't executing the function until
this line here within our map function
so let me go ahead and run this so that
you can see the results whenever we pass
in this list and the square function to
our map function so you can see here we
printed out the squares it took this
list of 1 through 5 and squared all of
those numbers and if I do that over here
in JavaScript then it does the same
thing and actually to get the same
result here I'm going to have to start
at 1 and go to the end of that so let me
save that and rerun it okay so now you
can see that we're getting the same
results okay so this is useful because
now we can pass any function into our
custom map function that we created so
for example I have a cube function down
here now let me grab this cube function
and just pass it in to our map function
and I'll do the same thing over here in
JavaScript so let me clear that out and
rerun that and in my Python example I'm
going to have to actually cut this out
and move it above here by the square
function so let me save that and rerun
it so you can see all that we did
differently was pass in this new
function as an argument to our map
function and then it used that function
within here to execute on each of these
values instead of the square function so
it's it's useful to be able to pass
around functions like this okay so
lastly let's see what it looks like to
return a function from another function
so that is one of the aspects of what it
means to be a first-class function now
this seems to be what trips people up
the most and I have to admit I get
tripped up on this all the time too
because it can get complicated to keep
track of everything and sometimes it can
be hard to visualize exactly what's
going on all at once but let's take a
look at some simple examples and see if
we can see what this looks like so let
me go ahead and just remove all the code
that I had and uncomment out these other
examples that I have down here okay so
first let's take a look at this really
simple logger function that I have so
I'm going to uncomment out these and
save these okay so this is one of the
simpler examples that I could think of
to start out with so we have this
function here called logger and this
logger function takes in an argument a
message argument and then within this
function we have another function called
log message and this function doesn't
take in any arguments and all it does
when you execute this log message
function is that it prints out this log
statement with the message that we
passed in to our logger function and now
down here at the bottom we are returning
this log message function that is within
our logger function now I know that
might sound confusing but let's go ahead
and run an example and walk through
see if we can see what's going on okay
so let me go ahead and execute this in
both Python and in JavaScript and let's
walk through exactly what just happened
so what we did is we set this log hi
variable equal to our logger function
and we passed in a message of hi and
then so this came in and it saw that we
had a function created here and then we
returned that function and again no
parenthesis so that function did not
execute at that time so now our log hi
variable is equal to this function
that's what got returned from this so
now we can run this log hi variable just
like it's a function because it is a
function so now we can treat this
variable just like this function here
and it doesn't take in any arguments so
if we put in these parentheses here and
what it's going to do is it's going to
execute this log message and then it
came in here and printed out the log
with our message so one thing important
to point out here is that from this step
two when we executed the function at
this step that it remembered our initial
message that we passed in to this
initial logger function now this is what
we call a closure but again I'll go in
more in-depth into closures in a future
video but this just kind of knocks the
point home that understanding these
first-class functions will help you
understand these more complex terms like
closures and higher-order functions okay
so why would returning a function from
another function like this be useful
well I tried to some of the practical
examples of this can get really
complicated really fast so I tried to
make a semi practical example that we
could look at and still understand
pretty well so I'm just going to remove
this logger function that I have here
and uncomment out the rest of the code
that we have here so let me do this in
Python also and I'll just go ahead and
run that and over here I'm going to
clear out the console and run that code
okay so let's see if we
and understand what's going on here so I
have a function here called HTML tag
which takes in an argument called tag
and within this function I have another
function called rat text and wrap text
takes in an argument called message and
when you execute this wrap text function
it prints out this it prints out the tag
within opening brackets here and then it
prints out the message and then it
prints out the tag again in closing
brackets and it does the same thing here
in JavaScript so then back to our HTML
tag function outside of the wrap text
what we're doing is returning this wrap
text function okay so now let's look at
our examples so I have this variable
called print h1 and I'm setting this
equal to our HTML tag function and I'm
passing in a an a string of h1 so at
this point whenever I do that actually
to kind of explain this a little bit
better I'm going to comment out these so
at this point it's not actually doing
anything yet so you can see if I rerun
this code it hasn't actually done
anything and if I come down here and
just print out this print h1 variable
then you can see that it's just equal to
this wrap text function so it's just
waiting to be executed so now we can use
this print h1 variable just like it's a
function because it is a function and if
I uncommon out these lines here now
remember the function that we returned
this wrap text function it takes in an
argument called message so I can pass in
I'm going to execute this print h1
variable that we just created and I'm
going to pass in the message of test
headline and then down here I'm running
this code again and I'm passing in a
message of another headline so whenever
I run this now you can see that it ran
our wrap text function and it remembered
the tag that we passed in before so it
prints out the tag that we passed in the
HTML tag function here and then it also
printed it out
our message that we passed into each of
these variables which is equal to our
rap text function and everything that
I'm describing over here in Python is
also the exact same thing that's
happening over here in JavaScript you
can see it's the exact same process
setting this variable equal to HTML tag
function passing in the tag of h1 it
returns the wrap text function waiting
for this message argument so now our
print h1 variable is equal to that
function that got returned waiting for
that message so now we can execute this
just like any other function we passed
in our message and it printed out our
tags with the message and then the
closing tags and then just to illustrate
the point a little further you can see
that the same thing down here starting
off with a paragraph tag instead so you
can see that that that worked as well
now there's a lot more practical
examples that people use this
functionality for a lot of people use
this for logging and in python it's it's
similar to how we use decorators and you
can see how returning functions like
this can get extremely complicated and
confusing because it's easy to lose
track of exactly what's going on and
like I said I'll go further into
closures and a future video but to
understand those we really need to have
a grasp on these first-class functions
and how we can use these functions not
just execute the functions but we can
also pass them around just like any
other variable we can assign them to
variables we can pass them in as
arguments like we did in our previous
example and we can return these
functions from other functions so
hopefully after this video you get a
sense of all the different things that
you can do with those so I think that's
going to do it for this video if you do
have any questions just feel free to ask
in the comment section below
be sure to subscribe for future videos
and thank you all for watching
you